I'm Martin faily and I am the guitar
luthier one of the guitar luthiers here
at Sweetwater and I'm going to show you
today how to properly restrain your
guitar why you should restrain your
guitar basically your strings start to
lose some of their tone when they get a
little bit older they lose some of their
tuning stability so that's when you need
to get your strings changed especially
if you play everyday that's that's
generally about every two weeks or so is
when you need to change your strings if
you play if you pick it up maybe once or
twice a week or so you could probably go
a little bit longer maybe even up to a
month but I'd say after a month you
should definitely have your strings
changed the guitar I have today is a PRS
SE custom straight from our warehouse
and I've got a couple tools to make this
stringing process a lot easier the tools
I have today are a string winder with a
cutter and a polish cloth okay so let's
get started basically just take the old
string off by detuning it all the way
and you repeat with the other five
strings this is a great winder by the
way it also has a cutter and a chromatic
tuner and it is a Planet Waves winder it
makes the job go a lot easier with those
other two components along with it when
all the strings are loose you want to
make sure you're careful with your
bridge so it doesn't just fall off and
drop off you want to keep an a hand on
that as you're taking the old strings
off if you want to just remove the
bridge then you can easily take the old
strings out the easiest way to remove
your old string is to expose a little
bit of the ball end put your clipper
right in there clip off the old head and
it removes off there easy at this point
when you have all the strings off the
fret boards exposed it's generally a
good time to use some conditioner on the
fret board just to get rid of some of
the oils and make the fretboard shine
really good
okay at this point we are ready to
restrain this guitar I am going to put a
set of Dia Dario's on here we also offer
some Ernie balls as well as GHS strings
among others we also have Martin
acoustic and elixir acoustic strings
available as well I'm ready to put the
string into the bridge with this bridge
you actually put the string in through
the front pull it all the way through
and then we're going to put it on to the
bridge posts and then it wraps around
through the front over the top of the
bridge and then we're ready to put it in
through the tuner
we're ready to wrap the string around
the tuning key and as a general rule you
should have three maybe four wraps
around the actual tuning post as a
maximum any more than that is just
excessive any less you may start losing
some tuning stability
well we've got our few wines around
there and we've got quite a bit of
excess string so I'm gonna go ahead and
I'm gonna clip that excess off
there's no need to have that in the way
while we're tuning the rest of the
strings up get it as close to the tuning
peg as you can and then move on
and also as a note when you're winding
the string make sure that the wine
wrapped down or towards the headstock
not not up and definitely don't wind the
wines on top of each other and as I'm
stringing you'll notice my fingers are
positioned in such a way so that this
finger is actually pushing down on the
string to allow the wraps to go down and
then my thumb is actually pulling on the
rest of the string to allow the bridge
to stay in place
all right well the strings are on it and
now we're ready to tune it to pitch the
first thing I do is I tune the lowest
string the low E all the way up to pitch
and I just then I continue with the a
and then the D the G the B in the E and
after those have been tuned then we go
back to the low E and then we start to
stretch out the string and that's going
to allow the string to wrap more tightly
around the tuning head and it's also
going to allow the string to sit much
better into the bridge so I'm going to
do that again and I may even repeat it
two or three more times just to make
sure I get perfectly stable tuning and
at that point you're ready to rock
what I've done today is tune the guitar
to pitch by ear but we offer a wide
variety of tuners that help you quickly
and accurately tune your guitar I've
shown you several products today related
to tuning your guitar and stringing your
guitar if you have any other questions
call your Sweetwater sales engineer